Notation:
- Uppercase letters from the beginning of the alphabet: **Attributes**.
- Uppercase letters from the end of the alphabet: **Sets of attributes**.
- $\mathbf{R(T)}$: relational schema with set of attributes T.
- **r**: instance of the relational schema (set of tuples).
- Lowercase letters from the end of the alphabet: **tuples of an instance**. 
- t\[X\]: tuple from with only attributes X.
- $XY$: shorthand for $X\cup Y$.
- $AB$: shorthand for $\{A, B\}$.
- $AX$: shorthand for $\{A\}\cup X$

Possible problems with relational schema:
- Redundancy of data (same data being written multiple time).
- Poor expressiveness (data being present only with conditions on other data).
- Anomalies during data writing.
- Anomalies during data removal.

Decomposition is the process of braking a table in multiple ones to reduce redundancy and increase expressiveness through the use of relations between tables.

Normalization: 
- Normalization theory can be applied directly following an approach to relational database design which is based on analyzing an application in terms of its elementary facts and the functional relationships among them, and then synthesizing a “good” set of relation schemas.
	- Lo scopo principale della teoria della normalizzazione è quello di fornire strumenti formali per la progettazione di basi di dati che non presentino anomalie, senza prendere in considerazione il costo delle operazioni.
- Functional dependencies:
	- Given a relation schema $R(T)$ and $X, Y ⊆ T$ , a functional dependency (FD) is a constraint on $R$ of the form $X \rightarrow Y$ ($X$ *functionally determines* $Y$ or $Y$ *is determined* by $X$) if for any legal instance r of $R$ a value of $X$ uniquely determines a value of $Y$.
		- In any legal instance r of $R$, if two tuples have the same $X$ value, then they will also have the same $Y$ value.
	- Given a set $F$ of FDs on a schema $R$, we say that $F \models X \rightarrow Y$, i.e. F logically implies $X\rightarrow Y$, if every instance r of $R$ that satisfies $F$ also satisfies $X \rightarrow Y$.
- Inference rules:
	- Armstrong's rules:
		- Reflexivity: If $Y \subseteq X$, then $X \rightarrow Y$
		- Augmentation: If $X \rightarrow Y$, $Z \subseteq T$ , then $XZ \rightarrow YZ$
		- Transitivity: If $X \rightarrow Y$, $Y \rightarrow Z$, then $X \rightarrow Z$
	- $F \vdash X \rightarrow Y \Leftrightarrow X\rightarrow Y$ can be inferred from $F$ using Armstrong’s axioms as inference rules. 
	- Inference rules proven by Armstrong rules:
		- $\{X \rightarrow Y, X \rightarrow Z\} \vdash X \rightarrow YZ$ (union rule)
		- $Z \subseteq Y ,\{X \rightarrow Y\} \vdash X \rightarrow Z$ (decomposition rule)
		- $\{\} \vdash X \rightarrow X$
		- $Z \subseteq Y,\{X \rightarrow Y\} \vdash XZ \rightarrow Y$
		- $W \subseteq Z, V \subseteq Y ,\{X \rightarrow Y\} \vdash XZ \rightarrow VW$
	- Armstrong’s axioms are sound and complete:
		- A consequence of this theorem is that we can substitute $\models$ with $\vdash$ and vice versa in all the previous results.
- Closure:
	- Closure of $F$:
		- Given a set $F$ of FDs, the closure of $F$, denoted by $F^{+}$, is: $F^{+} = \{X \rightarrow Y | F \vdash X \rightarrow Y\}$
		- The *implication problem* consists in deciding , given $F$, if a specific functional dependency $X\rightarrow Y$ is present in its closure $F^{+}$
			- To generate $F^{+}$ using Armstrong's axioms has exponential cost so it's inefficient.
	- Closure of X:
		- Given a schema $R(T , F)$, and $X \subseteq T$ , the closure of $X$, denoted by $X^{+}_{F}$ , is: $X^{+}_{F} = \{A \in T | F \vdash X \rightarrow A\}$.
		- $F\vdash X\rightarrow Y \Leftrightarrow Y\subseteq X^{+}_{F}$. 
			- This theorem let us check if $X\rightarrow Y\in F^{+}$ by computing the closure of $X^{+}_{F}$ that has a polynomial complexity.
			- Algorithm for $X^{+}_{F}$ (slow):
				- $X^{+}_{F} = X$ 
				- **while** ($X^{+}_{Old} \neq X^{+}_{New}$) **do**
					- $X^{+}_{Old} = X^{+}_{New}$
					- **for each** $Y \rightarrow Z \in F$ **do** 
						- **if** $Y \subseteq X^{+}_{F}$
							- **do** $X^{+}_{New} = X^{+}_{Old} + Z$
				- return $X^{+}_{New}$
			- Example:
				- $X = AB\; ;\; F=\{A\rightarrow C, AC\rightarrow D,E\rightarrow F\}$ 
				- $X^{+}_{0} = AB$
				- $A\subseteq X^{+}_{0}\;;\;X^{+}_{1} = AB + C$
				- $AC\subseteq X^{+}_{1}\;;\;X^{+}_{2} = ABC + D$
				- $E\nsubseteq X^{+}_{2}$
				- $X^{+}_{F} = ABCD$

